Conjunctivitis (Pinkeye):

Conjunctivitis, also known as pinkeye, is an inflammation of the conjunctiva. The conjunctiva is the thin clear tissue that lies over the white part of the eye and lines the inside of the eyelid.

Children get it a lot. It can be highly contagious (it spreads rapidly in schools and day cares), but it’s rarely serious. It's very unlikely to damage your vision, especially if you find it and treat it quickly. When you take care to prevent its spread and do all the things your doctor recommends, pinkeye clears up with no long-term problems.

Several things could be to blame, including:

Viruses, including the kind that causes the common cold
Bacteria
Irritants such as shampoos, dirt, smoke, and pool chlorine
A reaction to eyedrops
An allergic reaction to things like pollen, dust, or smoke. Or it could be due to a special type of allergy that affects some people who wear contact lenses.
Fungi, amoebas, and parasites
Conjunctivitis sometimes results from a sexually transmitted disease (STD ). Gonorrhea can bring on a rare but dangerous form of bacterial conjunctivitis. It can lead to vision loss if you don’t treat it. Chlamydia can cause conjunctivitis in adults. If you have chlamydia, gonorrhea, or other bacteria in your body when you give birth, you can pass pinkeye to your baby through your birth canal.

Pinkeye caused by some bacteria and viruses can spread easily from person to person, but it isn’t a serious health risk if diagnosed promptly. If it happens in a newborn baby, though, tell a doctor right away, as it might be an infection that threatens the baby’s vision.


“Pinkeye” isn’t an official medical term. Most eye doctors would probably associate the term pinkeye with mild conjunctivitis caused by bacteria or a virus.

Symptoms:

Symptoms of pink eye vary depending on the type of pink eye you have.

Burning, itchy eyes that discharge a thick, sticky mucus may indicate bacterial pink eye.
Tearing, a swollen lymph node under the jaw or in front of the ear, and a light discharge of mucus from one or both eyes are often signs of viral pink eye. People with viral pink eye commonly have symptoms of an upper respiratory infection or cold as well.
Redness, intense itching, and tears in both eyes may indicate allergic pink eye.
Slight blurring of vision.

Diagnosis and Treatment:

To diagnose pink eye (conjunctivitis), your doctor will ask about the usual symptoms, such as burning, itchy eyes that discharge a thick, sticky mucus and tearing. The doctor will also observe that your eye is inflamed. Often, the cause can be determined from your symptoms, medical history, and the eye exam findings alone. Most of the time, treatment is started right away while lab results are pending. Treatment may then be modified based on the results of lab tests.

What Are the Treatments for Pink Eye?

Home remedies might be enough to soothe pink eye symptoms associated with colds, minor infections, or allergies. Treatment consists primarily of cleansing the eyes.

To help relieve the discomfort of pink eye, apply a warm compress for 5 to 10 minutes, three to four times a day. Preservative-free artificial tears can be applied a few times a day. Never use steroid eye drops or medications from a friend without a doctor's prescription.

For pink eye that includes itching and both eyes would suggest an allergy. Place a cool compress on your closed eye and use nonprescription allergy or antihistamine eye drops to relieve itching and burning. If the condition worsens or does not improve in a few days, consult your doctor. Marked discomfort, loss of vision and involvement of one eye only suggests a more serious problem which needs to be medically evaluated by your health care provider or eye doctor.

Pink eye caused by a virus usually runs its course in one to three weeks. Because it is not caused by bacteria, viral conjunctivitis does not respond to antibiotics. It can also be highly contagious. If viral pink eye is suspected, your hands are "weapons" that will spread the infection. Don't share towels or washcloths. Artificial tears may help relieve symptoms of viral pink eye.

Pink eye caused by the herpes virus can be very serious and may be treated with prescription antiviral eye drops, ointment, or pills.


For pink eye caused by bacteria, the treatment will usually be antibiotic eye drops or ointment. This generally clears the symptoms within a few days. Be sure to complete the full course of antibiotic treatment. For more stubborn infections, an oral antibiotic may be prescribed. Oral antibiotics are prescribed for highly unusual cases of pink eye caused by gonorrhea or chlamydia. Sexual partners should also treated. Also, if pink eye doesn't go away after a month, you may be tested for chlamydia.

Allergic pink eye should respond to topical vasoconstrictors (medicines that narrow the blood vessels), antihistamines, or steroid eye drops. Again, never apply steroid drops for any eye symptoms without a doctor's prescription.

How Can I Prevent Pinkeye?

Pinkeye, also known as conjunctivitis, spreads very easily. But you can take steps to avoid getting it, or spreading it to other people.

Keep your hands clean. Wash them thoroughly and often, especially if you touch your eye or the area around it. If you have pinkeye, keep your hands off that eye.

Infection can also enter the body through the nose and mouth. So don’t share washcloths, bath towels, pillowcases, or handkerchiefs with others, even with family. Don’t use other people's eye drops or cosmetics, particularly eyeliner pencils and mascara.

If your child gets pinkeye, keep him out of school for a few days until the eye discharge stops and the redness is completely gone. Once one student comes down with pinkeye, it can easily spread to an entire class.

Don’t rub your eyes. This makes it worse.
Splash your face and eyes with cold water.
Use aqueous-based “artificial tears” .
Stick with your allergy treatment.

Pinkeye and Contact Lenses
Sometimes, chemicals used to clean contact lenses can irritate your eyes. You may find relief if you change how you clean your contacts, but be sure to disinfect them before you put them back in your eyes. Ask your eye doctor about the best way to do this.

If you wear contact lenses and you get pinkeye, you should remove them and:


Switch to glasses until your eye heals.
Get rid of the disposable lenses you were wearing when you got pinkeye.
Disinfect your lenses -- if they aren’t the kind you can throw away -- before you use them again.
Clean your lens case or replace it.
Ask your eye doctor if you should throw away other things, such as the solution you were using.