What Is a Stye?
It's a pimple or abscess that forms on your upper or lower eyelid. 

Sometimes the bacteria that normally live on the surface of your eyelid block an oil duct. Then it gets inflamed. Other times, germs and dead skin cells get trapped on the edge of your eyelid.

Most of the time a stye starts as a pimple next to an eyelash. It turns into a red, painful bump that can last several days before it bursts and then heals. Some styes are short-lived and heal on their own. Others may require a doctor’s care.

What Are the Symptoms?

A stye is a red, hot, very tender swollen bump near the edge of your eyelid. A chalazion, on the other hand, is a somewhat tender, smooth, round bump normally in the middle of your eyelid.

Understanding Styes -- Treatment:

Styes: How Do You Treat Them?
Yes, styes are painful and ugly. But they’re just a blocked oil gland on your eyelid and should go away on their own or with simple treatment in a few days.

Chalazia, which look like styes but are infected oil glands, often disappear on their own too. But it could take a month or more for them to go away.

Most of the time you can treat a stye at home. Apply a warm compress to the affected eye for 10 to 15 minutes 2 to 4 times a day for several days. After applying the compress, use your finger to press on the inflamed bump to try to unplug the oil gland. Doing this can ease your pain and inflammation and help the stye go away faster.

Keep your eye closed while you use the compress. When the stye comes to a head, keep using the compresses to put pressure on it until it ruptures. Don’t squeeze it -- let it burst on its own. Some styes spread skin infections when they pop. If that happens, you’ll have to take antibiotics.

How to Prevent Styes:

If you get a lot of styes, you may need to take better care of your eyelids. You want to get rid of the germs and dead skin cells that bacteria like to feed on. Put a few drops of mild baby shampoo into a teacup of warm water and stir. Use a cotton swab or washcloth to gently brush the soapy solution along the base of your eyelashes. Keep your eyes closed.

Don't have time to make up the mixture? Rub your closed lids with a washcloth dipped in baby shampoo while you’re in the shower. You don’t need more than 30 seconds per eye.
