What is retinal detachment?
Retinal detachment is an eye disorder caused by the spontaneous detachment of the neurosensory retina (inner layer of the retina) from the pigment epithelium (outer layer). When detachment occurs, fluid accumulates in the space left between the two layers and the detached retina cannot function or nourish itself properly. If left untreated, retinal detachment can eventually lead to a complete loss of eye function (blindness).

What causes it?
Retinal detachment can occur as a complication following damage caused by the vitreous gel, which fills the eyeball, exerting traction on a fragile area of the retina. Other causes include:

Tumours
Serious inflammation
Myopic macular hole in patients with high myopia
Complications resulting from previous eye surgery
Ocular trauma
Diabetic retinopathy
If the patient has previously suffered from a detached retina or there is a family history, the disorder may reappear. It is therefore advisable to have regular check-ups with the ophthalmologist.

How can it be prevented?
It is important for patients in the high-risk group to undergo regular eye check-ups at least once a year.. In the event of a sudden appearance or increase of floaters, light flashes or any of the above symptoms, the patient should visit the ophthalmologist as a matter of urgency. It is essential to diagnose the condition as quickly as possible, since prognosis is greatly improved if the macula or central area of the retina does not detach. It is advisable to perform preventive laser treatment as soon as tears have appeared on the retina and before detachment has taken place. Preventive laser treatment is also advisable for high-risk patients with peripheral retinal degenerative lesions that can eventually lead to a tear.

SYMPTOMS:-

As the condition does not cause pain and in many cases does not result in initial vision loss, it is important to be aware of the symptoms, even if they appear to be harmless. Typical symptoms and which usually appear succesively include:

Floaters (black spots that move as the eye moves). They are caused by changes in the vitreous
Light flashes. A highly significant symptom as it shows that traction is being exerted on the retina. They usually occur when the tear has already taken place
Black curtain across a part of the visual field. This occurs when retinal detachment has already taken place. Patients should see the ophthalmologist immediately
Distorted images followed by a significant decrease in visual acuity. This symptom occurs if the central area of the retina (macula) is damaged.

